\input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename acl-manual.info
@settitle AVR/ARM-Crypto-Lib Manual 1.0
@c %**end of header

@copying
This is a short example of a complete Texinfo file.
Copyright © 2011 Daniel Otte
@end copying

@titlepage
@title AVR/ARM-Crypto-Lib Manual 1.0
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage
@c Output the table of the contents at the beginning.
@contents
@ifnottex
@node Top
@top GNU Sample
@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@chapter About
This documentation is a guide to the AVR-Crypto-Lib and ARM-Crypto-Lib.
Instead of documenting the full API and each function we choose the approach
of documenting the structure of the API so you know what to do when you want
to use the library.

@chapter Generic stuff
@section File organisation
@section Build process
@section Testing system
@section Sizes in bits and bytes
 Working with cryptographic functions involves working with different
 lengths. Some times you want to know it in bits, sometimes in bytes and another
 time in words (how long a word is must be defined by the context).
 To reduce confusion, frustration and to avoid bugs we suffix a length 
 parameter with either _b, _B or _w depending on the meaning. 
 _b means in bits and _B means in bytes (big b big word) and _w meaning words.

@chapter Symmetric primitives

@section Block ciphers
@subsection What a block cipher does
 A block cipher is a algorithm which turn an input of fixed length into an 
 output of the same length (enciphering or encrypting). The transformation is 
 specified by a key which has to be of a fixed length, or a length of a given 
 set or range.
 Generally there is also an algorithm which turns the output back to the 
 previous input (deciphering or decrypting) when supplied with the same key.
 
@subsection List of available block ciphers
This is a list of the currently supported block ciphers:
@itemize @bullet
  @item AES (Advanced Encryption Standard)
  @item Camellia
  @item CAST5
  @item CAST6
  @item CS-Cipher
  @item DES (Data Encryption Standard)
  @item Khazad
  @item Noekeon
  @item Present
  @item RC5
  @item RC6
  @item Seed
  @item Serpent (AES finalist)
  @item Shacal1
  @item Shacal2
  @item Skipjack
  @item TDES (Tripple DES)
  @item Threefish
  @item XTEA
@end itemize

@subsection high frequent parameters:
  block size: 64 bits, 128 bits
  key size: 64 bits, 80 bits, 128 bits, 192 bits, 256 bits
  (note that some block ciphers use different sizes)

@subsection Parts of a block cipher 
@itemize @bullet
  @item encryption algorithm
  @item decryption algorithm
  @item mostly a set of subkeys
  @item mostly a keyschedule which generates the subkeys from the supplied key.
@end itemize
 As we can see here a block cipher normally has an algorithm besides the 
 encryption and decryption algorithm, which we call keyschedule.
 Mostly the encryption and decryption algorithm consist of multiple rounds,
 where each round (and sometimes between rounds) subkeys are needed to modify
 the data. This subkeys are generated by the keyschedule and stored in a state
 or context variable.
 Note that not all algorithms need a pregenerated context, sometimes it is easy
 to generate the subkeys "on the fly" so there is not always the need of a 
 context variable. In this case instead of a context the actual key is passed
 to the encryption and decryption function.

@subsection API of block ciphers
 The API is not always consistent due to the fact that we tried to optimize the
 code for size (flash, heap and stack) and speed (runtime of the different 
 components).
 Generally the API of the implemented block ciphers consists of:
@itemize @bullet 
 @item *_init function, which implements the keyschedule
 @item *_enc  function, which implements the encryption algorithm
 @item *_dec  function, which implements the decryption algorithm
 @item *_free function, which frees memory allocated for the keyschedule
 @item *_ctx_t context type, which can contain a keyschedule and other information
@end itemize 
@subsubsection *_init function
 The *_init function generally takes a pointer to the key as first parameter.
 For ciphers where the keysize is not fixed the second parameter gives the 
 keysize (in bits regularly) and the last parameter points to the context
 variable to fill.
 For some ciphers there are additional parameters like the number of rounds, 
 these parameters generally occur before the context pointer.
 
@subsubsection *_enc and *_dec functions
 The encryption and decryption function of a specific algorithm normally do not
 differ in their parameters. Generally these functions take a pointer to the 
 block to operate on. Some ciphers allow to specify two blocks, where the first
 one will be written to and the second will contain the source block. The two 
 blocks may overlap or be the same. Most ciphers have only one block pointer. 
 The block specified by the pointer is encrypted (if the *_enc function is 
 called) or decrypted (if the *_dec function is called).
 The last parameter specifies either the key direct (with a pointer to it) or
 is a pointer to a context created with the *_init function.
 It is guaranteed that the context is in the same state as before the *_enc or 
 *_dec function call. Most *_enc and *_dec functions do not modify the context
 at all, but some do for reducing dynamic memory requirements. So here are some
 limitations to the reentrant property.
 
@subsubsection *_free function
 A *_free function is only provided where needed (so most ciphers do not have 
 it). It is used to free memory dynamically allocated by the *_init function.

@subsubsection *_ctx_t type
 A variable of the *_ctx_t type may hold information needed by the *_enc or 
 *_dec function. It is initialized by the *_init function. If dynamic memory is 
 allocated by the *_init function also a *_free function is provided which frees
 the allocated memory. An initialized *_ctx_t variable may not be copied as it
 may contains pointers to itself.

@section Block cipher abstraction layer (BCAL)
The BlockCipeherAbstractionLayer (BCAL) is an abstraction layer which allows
usage of all implemented block ciphers in a simple way. It abstracts specific
function details and is suitable for implementations which want to be flexible
in the choosing of specific block ciphers. Another important aspect is that this
abstraction layer enables the implementation of block cipher operating modes
independently from concrete ciphers. It is very simple to use and reassembles 
the API used to implement individual ciphers.

The main component is a block cipher descriptor which contains the details of
the individual ciphers.

Care should be taken when choosing a specific keysize. It may be the case that
the chosen keysize is not compatible with the chosen block cipher.


@subsection Parts of BCAL
The BCAL is split up in different parts:
@itemize @bullet
  @item BCAL declaration for BCAL decriptors
  @item algorithm specific definitions of BCAL decriptors
  @item BCAL basic context type
  @item BCAL basic functions  
@end itemize

@subsubsection BCAL declaration for BCAL decriptors
The BCAL descriptor is a structure which is usually placed in FLASH or ROM since
modification is unnecessary. It contains all information required to use the
according block cipher.

@verbatim
typedef struct {
	uint8_t  type; /* 1==block cipher */
	uint8_t  flags;
	PGM_P    name;
	uint16_t ctxsize_B;
	uint16_t blocksize_b;
	bc_init_fpt init;
	bc_enc_fpt  enc;
	bc_dec_fpt  dec;
	bc_free_fpt free;
	PGM_VOID_P valid_keysize_desc;
} bcdesc_t; /* block cipher descriptor type */
@end verbatim

@table @var
  @item type
  should be set to @samp{1} to indicate that this descriptor is for a
  block cipher.

 @item flags
 defines what kind of init function is provided and what kind of decrypt
 and encrypt functions are provided.

 @table @asis
 @item bit 0
 if clear (@samp{0}) designates an init function with fixed key length, so
 the length parameter is omitted (@code{init(void* ctx, void* key)}).
 
 if set (@samp{1}) designates an init function which requires an explicit
 keysize argument (@code{init(void*ctx, uint16_t length_b, void* key)}).

 @item bit 1
 if clear (@samp{0}) designates that the encryption function transforms the
 plaintext block in place to the ciphertext (@code{enc(void* block, void* ctx)}).
 
 if set (@samp{1}) designates that the encryption function offers a dedicated
 pointers for input and output. The two regions may be the same
 (@code{enc(void* out, void* in, void*ctx)}).

 @item bit 2
 if clear (@samp{0}) designates that the decryption function transforms the
 ciphertext block in place to the plaintext (@code{dec(void* block, void* ctx)}).
 
 if set (@samp{1}) designates that the decryption function offers a dedicated
 pointers for input and output. The two regions may be the same
 (@code{dec(void* out, void* in, void*ctx)}).
 @end table

 @item name
 is a pointer to a zero terminated ASCII string giving the name of the
 implemented primitive. On targets with Harvard-architecture the string resides
 in code memory (FLASH, ROM, ...).

 @item ctxsize_B
 is the number of bytes which should be allocated for the context variable.

 @item blocksize_b
 is the number of bits on which the encrypt and decrypt function work on.

 @item init
 is a pointer to the init function (see @samp{flags} how the init function
 should be called). If there is no init function this field is NULL.

 @item enc
 is a pointer to the encryption function (see @samp{flags} how the encryption
 function should be called).

 @item dec
 is a pointer to the decryption function (see @samp{flags} how the decryption
 function should be called).

 @item free
 is a pointer to the free function or NULL if there is no free function.

 @item valid_keysize_desc
 is a pointer to a keysize descriptor structure which is used to validate
 that the chosen keysize is valid
@end table



@section Modes of operation

@section Stream ciphers
@subsection List of available stream ciphers
@subsection API of stream ciphers
@subsection Stream cipher abstraction layer (SCAL)

@section Hash functions
@subsection List of available hash functions
@subsection API of hash functions
@subsection Hash function abstraction layer (HFAL)

@section MAC functions
@section Pseudo random number generators (PRNGs)

@chapter Encodings
@section Base64
@section ASN.1

@chapter Big integer functions

@chapter Asymmetric Primitives
@section DSA
@section RSA
@section El-Gamal
@section MQQ

@bye

