@c acl_hashes.texi

@section Hash functions
 A hash function is an algorithm to map an arbitrary long message (in the form
 of a bit string) to a fixed length message digest or hash value.
 The hash function aims to be collision free, which means that it is not 
 practicable to find two messages with the same hash value (although this 
 collision must exist). Also it should not be practicable to construct a 
 message which maps to a given hash value.
 
@subsection List of available hash functions
 The following hash functions are currently implemented:
@itemize @bullet 
  @item Blake
  @item BlueMidnightWish
  @item CubeHash
  @item Echo
  @item Grøstl
  @item Keccak
  @item MD5
  @item SHA-256
  @item SHA-1
  @item Shabal
  @item Skein 
@end itemize 

@subsection High frequent parameters:
@table @asis
  @item block size 
  512 bits
  @item hash value size
  128 bits, 160 bits, 224 bits, 256 bits, 384 bits, 512 bits
@end table


@subsection Parts of a hash function 
@itemize @bullet  
  @item initialization function 
  @item compression algorithm
  @item finalization function
@end itemize 

@subsection hash function API
 The API is not always consistent due to the fact that we tried to optimize the
 code for size (flash, heap and stack) and speed (runtime of the different 
 components).
 Generally the API of the implemented block ciphers consists of:
@table @code
 @item *_init
 function, which implements the initialisation of the context
 @item *_nextBlock 
 function, which implements the compression algorithm
 @item *_lastBlock 
 function, which implements the the padding algorithm
 @item *_ctx2hash  
 function, which turns a context into an actual hash value
 @item *_ctx_t
 context type, which can contains the state of a hashing process
@end table

@subsubsection @code{*_init} function
 The @code{*_init} function generally takes a pointer to the context as parameter.
 This function initializes the context with algorithm specific values.
 
@subsubsection @code{*_nextBlock} function
 The @code{*_nextBlock} function is the core of each hash function. It updates the hash 
 state with a given message block. So this function uses a context pointer and 
 a message pointer as parameters. The size of a message block is fixed for each
 hash function (mostly 512 bit). For the last block of a messages which may be
 smaller than the blocksize you have to use the @code{*_lastBlock} function described
 below.
 
@subsubsection @code{*_lastBlock} function
 The @code{*_lastBlock} function finalizes the context with the last bits of a 
 message. Since the last block is not required to have the blocksize you have
 to specify the length of the last block (normally in bits). This function
 performs the padding and final processing.

@subsubsection @code{*_ctx2hash} function
 The @code{*_ctx2hash} function turns a given hash context into an actual hash value.
 If multiple sized hash value may be created from a context it is necessary to
 give the the size of the hash value as parameter. 
 

@subsection Hash function abstraction layer (HFAL)


